# Rana sierrae at Dusy Basin

This is a project I have been working on with Kathleen Matthews, Zack Steel, and Sébastien Nusslé while I was in Stephanie Carlson’s lab https://nature.berkeley.edu/carlsonlab/.  Kathleen had gone out every summer for many years to count yellow legged frogs at Dusy Basin in Kings Canyon National Park (*Rana sierra*, the Sierra Nevada Mountain yellow legged frog). We compiled counts from 1997-2012. Volunteers went out at least three times a year (July, August, September) and counted the frogs at their various life-stages. We analyzed this dataset as a collaborative effort. 


# Abstract:

The Sierra Nevada yellow-legged frog (*Rana sierrae*) was once an abundant and widely distributed amphibian in California’s alpine ranges. However, today it is critically endangered, and most populations have been extirpated. *Rana sierrae* is adapted to high-elevation, fishless habitats. It has a unique life-cycle that involves an extended juvenile phase due to the short growing season typical of its alpine habitat. Here we present a 15-year demographic study of a *R. sierrae *population in 15 lakes at Dusy Basin in Kings Canyon National Park. We focused on the period leading up to the arrival of a pathogenic chytrid fungus, *Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis* (*Bd*), and the subsequent local extinction of *R. sierrae*. We used N-mixture abundance modeling, which accounts for detection probabilities at different life stages, to quantify factors affecting frog abundance, including egg-masses, tadpoles, subadults, and adults. Abundance of all life stages was negative correlation with presence of introduced trout (*Oncorhynchus mykiss* and *O. aquabonita*). Lake surface area correlated positively with frog abundance in all life stages, but negatively with lake depth. While deeper lakes historically served as buffers during dry years, they are now effectively unavailable to the frogs due to presence of predatory, non-native trout, with shallow lakes now providing important refugia from predators. However, drought years characterized by longer summers and less winter snowpack, led to higher rates of lake drying and, hence, a decrease in frog reproduction and a reduction of individuals in the earlier life stages. Finally, our results suggest that the frequency of such droughts in the region has increased since 1937. Increased frequency or severity of droughts is expected to decrease the value of shallow lakes for yellow-legged frogs because these habitats are prone to drying. We discuss our results in terms of future restoration strategies, including reintroduction and treatment, in this changed and changing ecosystem.
